In this lecture, we are going to add support for uninstalling the plugin.
We have a fully functional plugin.
The code is clean, organized and secure for WordPress.
However, there may be users who disagree for one reason or another.
They may have found another plugin that's even better.
In such cases, they will uninstall our plugin.
Currently, our plugin does not clean itself from a site.
This is a common problem among thousands of plugins available to you.
Plugin developers will spend a lot of time adding database tables, plugin settings and uploading files
to your site during an installation.
None of this is removed from your site, thus your site is left feeling bloated.
Purging a plugin is often an overlooked step for beginners.
It's not enough to delete the plugin.
Other areas must be wiped from a site.
For this course, we're going to properly clean our plugin from WordPress during an installation.
The process for handling on installation is easy with WordPress in our plugins directory, create a
file called Uninstall PHP.
WordPress will execute the code inside this file when our plugin is uninstalled.
It's completely optional to have this file, but it's recommended.
There's one problem with creating this file.
It's extremely dangerous.
The leading data from a site cannot be undone easily before executing the code.
We should verify that the user wants to uninstall our plugin at the top of the file.
Add a conditional statement.
The condition will check if the WP uninstall plugin consent was not defined with the defined function.
WordPress creates this constant.
It will only be created when a plugin is being uninstalled.
If this constant does not exist, this file should not run inside the conditional block at the exit
statement.
If this constant is defined, we can proceed with uninstalling our plugin below the conditional statement.
Run the delete option function.
The first step we'll take is deleting the option from our database.
This information is not necessary for the current WordPress site.
This function will delete an option from the database.
This function has one argument which is the name of the option.
The name of our option was called up options.
Next, let's delete the recipe ratings table.
Add the WP DB global variable.
On this object.
Run a function called query.
I'm introducing a new function called query.
The query function will allow us to run a raw query.
Unlike the other functions, the results of the query are not returned.
Instead, this function will return the number of rows affected by the query.
Let's use this function for deleting a table.
The query can be passed in as a string.
Add the following query drop table if exists.
WP db prefix recipe ratings.
The query we've written is different than any query we've written before.
Let's break it down.
The drop table keywords will instruct the database to delete a table.
Afterward, we're adding the if exists.
Keywords.
These keywords are optional by including them as SQL will not throw an error if the table does not exist.
If an error gets thrown, this may interrupt the installation process.
It can cause WordPress to not delete our plugin from a site.
We should not disrupt the installation process.
I recommend including these keywords as an extra precaution.
Next, we can provide the name of the table.
In this example, we are dropping the recipe ratings table.
Overall, the query is very simple.
Before testing this file, let's back up our in.
Otherwise, we're going to lose our work.
Open the plugins folder in your file explorer.
Zip the Udemy plus plug in.
Next, let's open the plugins page in the admin dashboard.
I'm going to deactivate and delete the plugin.
After uninstalling the plugin, the plugin files will completely disappear from our site.
Let's verify the table was deleted by opening the database in another tab.
As you can see, the recipe ratings table is gone.
Perfect.
I recommend activating the utility plus plugin through the zip file.
We deleted it for testing purposes.
As you do so, I want to answer a crucial question.
Oftentimes beginner developers will ask me if they should delete content related to the custom post
type.
The answer is it depends.
Some plugins will completely wipe custom post type data.
Other plugins will not.
The reason we're not purging custom post type data has to do with the possibility of other areas in
WordPress using the custom post type.
It's not uncommon for plugins to access data from other post types.
Deleting custom post type data can potentially break a site.
The recipe table was a custom table.
It's highly unlikely a plug and we'll know how to work with it, let alone know its existence.
The table was outside the scope of WordPress is API, therefore we should clean it up.
Custom post type data and metadata are features within WordPress scope, so it's perfectly fine to leave
that data there.
At the end of the day, it's up to you.
If you want to delete the custom post type data, that's fine.
In the next lecture, let's explore some tools for debugging WordPress.